docs/command-files.md, before:

# Cursor Commands

Natural language commands for Cursor IDE. Type `/command-name` in Cursor chat to trigger workflows.

**Canonical command definitions** (the markdown files Cursor executes) live in the repo at **`commands/`**. Those files are the source of truth. This page describes how to install and use them.

**User-oriented documentation** (what each command does, usage, examples) is in [Commands](commands/index.md).

---

## Quick Reference

### Product
| Command | Usage |
|---------|-------|
| `/create-task` | Create task in tracker (story, epic, bug, task, etc.) |
| `/decompose-task` | Decompose large task into subtasks |

### Planning
| Command | Usage |
|---------|-------|
| `/create-plan` | Create technical implementation plan |

### Development
| Command | Usage |
|---------|-------|
| `/start-task` | Start working on story |
| `/complete-task` | Create PR and push |

### Quality
| Command | Usage |
|---------|-------|
| `/create-test` | Generate unit tests (adapts for backend/frontend) |
| `/review-code` | AI code review |

### Utilities
| Command | Usage |
|---------|-------|
| `/mcp-status` | Check MCP server authentication status |

---

## Installation

Copy the command files from **`commands/`** (at the repository root) into Cursor's commands directory.

### Option 1: Project Commands

```bash
cp -r commands/* /path/to/project/.cursor/commands/
```

### Option 2: Global Commands

```bash
cp -r commands/* ~/.cursor/commands/
```

### Option 3: Team Commands

For Cursor Team/Enterprise:
1. Go to [Cursor Dashboard → Team Content → Commands](https://cursor.com/dashboard?tab=team-content&section=commands)
2. Create team commands from the files in `commands/`
3. Commands auto-sync to team members

---

## Example Workflow

**Development Cycle:**
```
/create-task --type=story for [feature]
/decompose-task EPIC-123  # If breaking down large work
/create-plan for PROJ-123
/start-task PROJ-123
/create-test --type=unit for [component]  # As needed
/complete-task PROJ-123
/review-code for PR #42
```

**Epic to Story Flow:**
```
/create-task --type=epic from phase-one.md
/decompose-task EPIC-123
/create-plan for STORY-10
/start-task STORY-10
/complete-task STORY-10
```

---

## Command File Format

Each `.md` file in `commands/` contains structured instructions (Definitions, Prerequisites, Steps, Tools, Guidance) that Cursor's AI interprets to run the workflow. Commands are plain markdown—no compilation. They adapt to your project's structure, frameworks, and conventions.

---

## Configuration

Commands require MCP servers for Jira/ADO and GitHub. See [MCP Setup](mcp-setup.md).

---

## Troubleshooting

**Commands not showing?**
Restart Cursor after copying files.

**Command fails?**
Check MCP servers are configured in Cursor Settings.

**Integration error?**
Verify credentials and permissions in MCP settings.

Commit message:

feat(schemas): define command structure JSON schemas (FB-18)

docs/command-files.md, after:

# Cursor Commands

Natural language commands for Cursor IDE. Type `/command-name` in Cursor chat to trigger workflows.

**Canonical command definitions** (the markdown files Cursor executes) live in the repo at **`commands/`**. Those files are the source of truth. This page describes how to install and use them.

**User-oriented documentation** (what each command does, usage, examples) is in [Commands](commands/index.md).

---

## Quick Reference

### Product
| Command | Usage |
|---------|-------|
| `/create-task` | Create task in tracker (story, epic, bug, task, etc.) |
| `/decompose-task` | Decompose large task into subtasks |

### Planning
| Command | Usage |
|---------|-------|
| `/create-plan` | Create technical implementation plan |

### Development
| Command | Usage |
|---------|-------|
| `/start-task` | Start working on story |
| `/complete-task` | Create PR and push |

### Quality
| Command | Usage |
|---------|-------|
| `/create-test` | Generate unit tests (adapts for backend/frontend) |
| `/review-code` | AI code review |

### Utilities
| Command | Usage |
|---------|-------|
| `/mcp-status` | Check MCP server authentication status |

---

## Installation

Copy the command files from **`commands/`** (at the repository root) into Cursor's commands directory.

### Option 1: Project Commands

```bash
cp -r commands/* /path/to/project/.cursor/commands/
```

### Option 2: Global Commands

```bash
cp -r commands/* ~/.cursor/commands/
```

### Option 3: Team Commands

For Cursor Team/Enterprise:
1. Go to [Cursor Dashboard → Team Content → Commands](https://cursor.com/dashboard?tab=team-content&section=commands)
2. Create team commands from the files in `commands/`
3. Commands auto-sync to team members

---

## Example Workflow

**Development Cycle:**
```
/create-task --type=story for [feature]
/decompose-task EPIC-123  # If breaking down large work
/create-plan for PROJ-123
/start-task PROJ-123
/create-test --type=unit for [component]  # As needed
/complete-task PROJ-123
/review-code for PR #42
```

**Epic to Story Flow:**
```
/create-task --type=epic from phase-one.md
/decompose-task EPIC-123
/create-plan for STORY-10
/start-task STORY-10
/complete-task STORY-10
```

---

## Command File Format

Each `.md` file in `commands/` contains structured instructions (Definitions, Prerequisites, Steps, Tools, Guidance) that Cursor's AI interprets to run the workflow. Commands are plain markdown—no compilation. They adapt to your project's structure, frameworks, and conventions.

Command structure can be validated against the JSON Schema in **`schemas/`**. Run `python schemas/validate.py commands/<name>.md` after `pip install -r requirements.txt`. See `schemas/README.md` in the repository for details.

---

## Configuration

Commands require MCP servers for Jira/ADO and GitHub. See [MCP Setup](mcp-setup.md).

---

## Troubleshooting

**Commands not showing?**
Restart Cursor after copying files.

**Command fails?**
Check MCP servers are configured in Cursor Settings.

**Integration error?**
Verify credentials and permissions in MCP settings.
